Test documentation cfc003 fan off (#966)
Dasharo/docs: docs/unified-test-documentation/dasharo-performance/406-custom-fan-curve.md

1. Open the terminal window and run the following command:

    ```bash

>     stress-ng --cpu $(nproc --all) --cpu-load 100 --timeout 1m

Author: Generally I don't think there is much more to say than here https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/files/97a35b5be643015677f878d1649bad819246db1b#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808R56-R57

Higher load == higher temps, and targeting for specific areas of the curve is a rather a manual task that would . The automatic test somewhat brute forces it by measuring the fans and temps for every integer load  value in range 1-100.
Would that be better? https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/compare/4beda58%5E..4beda58

>     stress-ng --cpu $(nproc --all) --cpu-load 100 --timeout 1m

Reviewer: That's sufficient

**Test description**

This test aims to verify that the fan curve is configured correctly in the OFF
profile and the fan does not spin, or barely spins, which depends on the type
of the fan.

**Test configuration data**

1. `FIRMWARE` = Dasharo

**Test setup**

1. Proceed with the
   [Test cases common documentation](#test-cases-common-documentation) section.
1. Install `stress-ng` on the DUT.
1. Install `lm-sensors` on the DUT

**Test steps**

1. Power on the DUT.
1. While the DUT is booting, hold the `BIOS_SETUP_KEY` to enter the UEFI Setup
   Menu.
1. Enter the `Dasharo System Features` menu using the arrow keys and Enter.
1. Enter the `Power Management Options` submenu.
1. Verify that the `Fan profile` field is set to `Off` - if not, using
   the arrow keys and `Enter`, choose the `Off` option.
1. Press `F10` to save the changes.
1. If necessary - press `Y` to confirm saving the changes.
1. Go back to the main menu using the `ESC` key.
1. Select the `Reset` option to apply the settings and reboot.
1. Boot into the system.
1. Log into the system by using the proper login and password.
1. Open the terminal window and run the following command:

    ```bash

>     stress-ng --cpu 16 --timeout 30m

Reviewer: 30 minutes? Why so long?

Author: I don't know. Someone decided on that when the test case was originally created. Maybe to make sure that CPU reaches the highest possible temperature? I too doubt it would take so long.

Author: Then maybe stress-ng should be run a couple of times, for short amounts of time, increasing the number of workers used each time? That could help with covering the whole temperature curve more equally.

Author: Something like that?
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/compare/ea88d76%5E..ea88d76

If so then the automatic tests also need to be altered to work like that.

Reviewer: > Then maybe stress-ng should be run a couple of times, for short amounts of time, increasing the number of workers used each time? That could help with covering the whole temperature curve more equally.

It might be hard to cover whole temperature range in a noticeable way. I wouldn't go that far.

I think that 1 minute is max what is needed. Yet, yo can also observe how the RPM decreases when the CPU cools down. Cooling is slower than heating up.

Author: @miczyg1
Then the suggested changes from my comment above should be reverted.

Here's the diff:
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/compare/7d2bb549f47f10a37732715df90a2008a5918d14..7b65960abdd1529efbd4aef5598204213a1e117a

Reviewer: I just asked why it has to be 30minutes. Simply changing to 1m was enough to resolve it.

> I think that 1 minute is max what is needed. Yet, yo can also observe how the RPM decreases when the CPU cools down. Cooling is slower than heating up. It is not necessary to gradually change the number of CPU workers.

Seeing the test log provided in OSFV PR, it seems I have hit the jackpot. Fan slows down slower than the CPU cools down.

    ```

1. Make a couple of measurements of the temperature and fan speeds
   in a [device specific way](#measuring-the-temperature-and-fan-speeds)
1. Note the results.

**Expected result**
The values of CPU temperature and fan speeds should match the
[device specific instructions](#verifying-the-temperature-and-fan-speeds)
on verifying the `Off` fan curve.

## Measuring the temperature and fan speeds

=== "Protectli"
    === "VP66xx & VP32xx"
        1. Run the following command to load the kernel module required for
           measuring the fan RPM
           ```bash
           sudo modprobe it87 force_id=0x8786
           ```
        1. Run the following command to detect available sensors
           ```bash
           sudo sensors-detect
           ```
        1. Run the following command to read the temperature and RPM
           ```bash

>            watch -n1 "sensors it8786-isa* | grep -E 'fan|temp1'"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           watch -n1 "sensors it8786-isa-* | grep -E 'fan|temp1'"
```
I think you have to add a `-` here, otherwise the command does not recognize it as a wildcard properly?

Author: That's true!

           ```

> <!--

Author: It doesn't work on any device I've tried. Including the laptops that supposedly were supporting it historically. I can't tell why it does not work anymore, but installing Ubuntu release from the time of the tests didn't help and those hwmon files just don't exist.

> <!--

Reviewer 2: We do not currently support this on NovaCustom. Let's just remove this as it's dead code and whenever we add fan monitoring back, it'll be different anyway.

=== "Novacustom"
    1. Open the terminal window and run the following command to get the
       temperature:

       ```bash
       cat /sys/devices/LNXSYSTM:00/LNXSYBUS:00/17761776:00/hwmon/hwmon3/temp1_input
       ```

       > The last three digits of the output are the value of the number after the
          decimal point. Example output `47000` means 47°C.

    1. In the terminal window run the following command to get the PWM value of the
       CPU fan:

       ```bash
       cat /sys/devices/LNXSYSTM:00/LNXSYBUS:00/17761776:00/hwmon/hwmon3/pwm1
       ```
-->
## Verifying the temperature and fan speeds

=== "Protectli"
    === "VP66xx"
        The fans have a minimal RPM of `~200 RPM`, and a maximum up to `~3200 RPM`.
        When in `off` state they still spin at `~200 RPM`.

        === "Silent"
            The fans:

            - Leave the `off` state and start spinning up at `50°C`, if were in `off` state
            - Enter the `off` state at `40°C`, if not in `off` state before
            - Reach the maximum speed at `85°C`
            - Spin at RPM directly proportional to the temperature

>               at temperature between `50°C` and `85°C`

Reviewer: These satetements are kind of confusing. What does it mean `leave/enter the off state` or `start spinning`? One does not spin the fans, hardware does it automatically. If you would like to describe the behavior of the fans, then it could be improved and simplified:

```
- start spinning at 50 degrees and stop spinning at 40 degrees (hysteresis)
- spin up proportionally to the CPU temperature, reaching maximum RPM at 85 degrees
```

Author: > One does not spin the fans, hardware does it automatically.

Sorry, I don't know what that refers to.

> start spinning at 50 degrees and stop spinning at 40 degrees (hysteresis)

I wasn't sure how to use the word hysteresis or deadband in a sentence to make it clear, especially that the fans don't actually stop spinning on VP66xx, so I've described it like that instead.
If you think that's better then I have no objections.

Author: https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/compare/a72280a%5E..a72280a

Author: Why not use a plugin for mkdocs that would generate some pretty graphs from text?
https://timvink.github.io/mkdocs-charts-plugin/usage/

Reviewer: That's one option too.

Reviewer: What about the graphs then?

Author: Example fan curve graph using https://github.com/timvink/mkdocs-charts-plugin

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a0a3ea6b-6512-47d9-a409-98c913e28f59)

https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/999

Reviewer: @mkopec please resolve if you think it is addressed

Values `expected_speed` and `actual_speed` are strongly similar. This means
that the fan control is set correctly.

## CFC003.001 Custom fan curve OFF profile measure (Ubuntu)

**Test description**

The fan has been configured to follow a custom curve. This test aims to verify
that the fan curve is configured correctly in the OFF profile and the

> fan does not spin, or barely spins, which depends on the type of the fan.

Reviewer: How can it follow a custom curve if the profile is OFF? The first sentence should just be dropped.

Author: Sentence dropped
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/commits/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808L204-R118

> The test requires the device to use have the IT87 EC. For example Protectli

Reviewer: `to use have the IT87 EC`, use or have? Dop you talk about driver or chip? Make up your mind please.

Author: Sentence dropped, as in the other comment
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/commits/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808L204-R118

> VP66xx, VP32xx and VP2420.

Reviewer: Many other Protectli platforms have ITE ECs. But it only makes sense to test it on VP66xx (and optionally VP32xx with the case extension). I would just drop the whole sentence

Author: Sentence dropped. The details are described in device specific tabs
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/commits/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808L204-R118

**Test configuration data**

1. `FIRMWARE` = Dasharo

**Test setup**

1. Proceed with the
   [Test cases common documentation](#test-cases-common-documentation) section.
1. Install `stress-ng` on the DUT.
1. Install `lm-sensors` on the DUT

**Test steps**

1. Power on the DUT.
1. While the DUT is booting, hold the `BIOS_SETUP_KEY` to enter the UEFI Setup
   Menu.
1. Enter the `Dasharo System Features` menu using the arrow keys and Enter.
1. Enter the `Power Management Options` submenu.
1. Verify that the `Fan profile` field is set to `OFF` - if not, using

>    the arrow keys and `Enter`, choose the `Performance` option.

Reviewer: Why do we choose performance if we test OFF?

Author: Fixed here
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/compare/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67..11b0d272dacd14052ca926596c57391341ac2216#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808L138-R138

1. Press `F10` to save the changes.
1. If necessary - press `Y` to confirm saving the changes.
1. Go back to the main menu using the `ESC` key.
1. Select the `Reset` option to apply the settings and reboot.
1. Boot into the system.
1. Log into the system by using the proper login and password.
1. Open the terminal window and run the following command to load the EC sensor
kernel module:

    ```bash

>     sudo modprobe it87 force_id=0x8786

Reviewer: This is wrong. You cannot force this chip for all platforms. What if a platform have a ITE EC supported by the driver? Such forcing would cause issues. This command is only applicable for selected Protectli platforms as a workaround.

The test description should use `sudo modprobe it87`. And if no supported chip is found then specify workaround parameters for particular platforms. Then you can enumerate that these Protectli platforms (VP66xx and VP32xx) should use the command `sudo modprobe it87 force_id=0x8786`

Author: Moved the instructions to a tab for a specific device. Our test instructions are always very specific. In my opinion, what chip to use should be written down in the test description for a given device. Once we start supporting this test suite on some devices we could update the instructions with the device specific steps.

https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/commits/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808R163-R178

    ```

1. Open the terminal window and run the following command to run a stress test
on the CPU:

    ```bash
    stress-ng --cpu 16 --timeout 30m
    ```

1. Open the terminal window and run the following command to get the
   temperature and fans' RPM:

    ```bash

>     watch -n1 "sensors it8786-isa-0a20 | grep -E 'fan|temp1'"

Reviewer: And `it8786-isa-0a20` is wrong again. Based on detected chip, it may be something different than `it8786`. ALso the `0a20` is the I/O base address of the ITE EC, which may be different depending on BIOS/firmware used. It must not be hardcoded.

First, one should invoke `sudo sensors-detect` to detect available sensors. Then one can see with `sensors` what name the sensors have. Only then you can read from specific sensor once you know the name. HEre you just assume it will always be it8786, which might not be always true. Also the I/O base may be different.  Wildcards may help here, e.g. `sensors it8786-isa-*`. Maybe `it8*-isa-*` would work too, then all chips should be covered (the driver supports some IT86 and IT87 series)

And as I wrote earlier, the specific it8786 chip should be only used for Protectli. The test description should warn that results may be different on other platforms.

Author: The instructions for the previous tests are also hardcoded and specific to one platform. And they don't even work anymore.
The whole test should be rewritten anew.
I would write it like the `unified` device documentations, so that you can click a button to see instructions for a specific device.

Reviewer: > The instructions for the previous tests are also hardcoded and specific to one platform. And they don't even work anymore. The whole test should be rewritten anew. I would write it like the `unified` device documentations, so that you can click a button to see instructions for a specific device.

So, you can see that thinking a few steps ahead is worth it. Good abstraction of things lets the code/documentation be reused and be less outdated quickly.

Author: Moved to a device specific tab, described it in another comment
https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/966/commits/6f41cf3413bc114523bcdf11a282000988202e67#diff-4185a29013b0006ce678aed545835ecbfc33969e88a848d8f3150c38de740808R163-R178

    ```

1. Note the results.

**Expected result**

> The fan PWM should be equal to `0` or be low and don't increase with temperature
> , for example ~`250` RPM. This depends on the model of the fan used.

Reviewer: This is not PWM... I would rewrite it like this.

```suggestion
The fan RPM value should be constant and equal to `0` or oscillate around a low RPM value (the minimal RPM value depends on the fan characteristic and may even reach `250` RPM) regardless of the CPU temperature.
```
